---
title: Solo
date: 2018-11-23
done: true
---

Friday morning, and I'm on my own in the boat.
I have two and a half days to get it back to the marina,
and just over ten miles (~17km) of flat canal to get there.
Even at canal-boat speeds, that will be easy to do.

If I had nicer weather, longer daylight hours,
and maybe a crew,
I might try to go farther:
Continue along the Grand Union Canal,
through the other big tunnel to Stoke Breune to visit the canal museum.
Or if we really felt adventurous,
head down the Northampton arm, all seventeen locks of it,
to the city before turning back around.

But it's the last week of November,
cold and dim,
and I'm on my own,
so I'll be taking it easy.

Before heading off: the daily maintenance routine.
I opened up the engine hatch,
adjusted the stern packing grease pressure,
then opened up the weed hatch access and unclamped its heavy steel lid.
Inside, bad news.
Bits of raggedy fabric floating all around the propeller.
We must have picked it up while going through the locks yesterday,
and never picked up enough speed to notice the impact.

I rolled up my sleeves,
tugged up my rubber gloves as far as they would go,
and slipped my hands into the cold water.

I could grab hold of the end of the rag no problem,
but it was too twisted and torn to come out easily.
Another user of the boat had left a cheap utility knife
lying beside the hatch opening — surely for just this purpose.
I hacked at the rag, then carefully pulled out the pieces.

When I was satisfied that I'd pulled out as much as I possibly could,
I closed up the hatches and climbed back into the cabin,
to thaw out my hands for a moment
and swap rubber gloves for fleece mitts.

Then I grabbed my water bottle, canal guidebook,
and a few one-handed snacks (a banana and a mini chocolate bar),
and headed out for my journey.
I started the engine,
untied the boat,
flipped up the hanging bumpers,
and — oh, yeah — I guess I need a tiller.

The tiller, that essential piece of equipment used to steer the boat,
comes in two parts.
The curved vertical section is steel
and is permanently attached to the boat.
the horizontal handle is made of wood and brass
and comes off easily so you can store it inside.
The two are held together by a straight brass pin,
which on some boats features decorative characters.
(Hazel, the woman who gave us a tow last week,
had a very nice little dragon on her tiller pin.)

Luckily, no one else was passing by as I started to drift away from shore
while reaching into the cabin for my tiller.
With it properly in place,
I started off.

It was a gray, misty day
Warmer than yesterday, but not by much.
I passed many moored boats, but none moving.
It was quiet enough that now and then I dared slow down to take a photo,
holding the tiller steady between my elbow and my waist.

At one point, I thought I saw a boat coming towards me,
through a narrow brick bridge. (Of course!)
But as I moved forward, it became clear that
the other boat wasn't moving at all,
but was moored up on the other side of the canal.
Going slowly, I was able to read the sign in front of the bridge:

> Canalside Art Studio and Gallery
> Open Fri-Mon 10-4
> 50yds →

Rhoda had pointed out this bridge when we'd passed through the other way.
On the other side, there isn't just a sign for the gallery,
but an art installation:
a figure of a man and his dog sitting by the canal.

Since it was Friday and during the appointed hours,
and since I could probably use a stop and a stretch anyway,
I decided to check it out.
I pulled in to moor up past the bridge
(on the tow-path side,
opposite the moored up boat I'd first noticed and two of its neighbours).

I was having trouble straitening the boat tight against the shore.
It had a reinforced edge,
but there was clearly a lot of mud gathered up below it.
As I adjusted back and forth, trying to get clear of the mud,
while still staying clear of the boats on the other side,
I ended up swinging over too far and got stuck on the other side.

A white goose stood on the shore, staring at me.
Defeated, I put the boat in neutral
and took a few photos of it and the boats and their canalside gardens.
By the time I put my phone back in my pocket,
my stern end had swung back out in the canal far enough
that I could safely reverse (slowly) without bumping the moored-up broad boat.

I continued backing up until I could swing back towards the other shore.
This time, I didn't try any fancy maneuvres.
With my back end bumping the wall,
I grabbed my boat hook and the rope attached to the middle of the boat
(the end of which is always pulled back to within the steerer's reach),
and hopped off to tug the boat into place.
Even when pulling on the ropes, I couldn't get it tight against the shore.
But that was OK.
I tied it up with about a foot's gap between wall and boat.

After all that trouble, I couldn't find the gallery.

I walked in the direction indicated for a few hundred yards,
until the country road met up with a much busier one,
but the only sign from the road advertised farm fresh eggs.
It's possible that the same farm housed
the promised art studio and home gallery,
but I didn't ring the bell to find out.
I wasn't likely to buy anything, anyway,
and I'd already served the goal of stretching my legs.
I went back to the boat,
had a snack, and started off again —
with a long push from my boat hook to get me away from the muddy shore.

For a while, I was worried that
more than just mud had clogged my propeller at that stop.
Maybe I should have checked the weed hatch again while I was tied up.
I chugged along slowly,
trying the hard-reverse-and-switch trick
whenever I was on a clear, straight section of the canal.

It eventually seemed to clear the problem,
although I was never going very fast anyway.
Many sections of the canal were deceptively wide,
with most of that width being shallow and muddy.
There were also many moored-up boats,
and you always have to slow down to pass them.
Otherwise, people come out and yell because you've tipped over their tea!

We're back on the broad canals,
and that means more variety in boat styles.
I took a few photos of some of the more distinctive ones.
On the last photo, my tiller elbow lost some control
and I ended up aiming a little too close to shore.
I started to correct, then realized
I was just around the bend from my next planned mooring-up spot,
in Weedon Bec.
So I decided to pretend that I intended to steer into the shore,
and tied up where I was.

The original plan had only been to stop
for shopping and lunch and a bit of a break,
but by the time all that was done
(and I'd written this post up to here)
it was nearly 3pm,
which meant only an hour before dark.
It would be tight schedule to get to the next village as planned.

I only travelled three miles today,
but I think that's all it will be.