---
title: Rugby
date: 2018-11-16
---

Rugby the town, not rugby the game,
although we did pass by the statue of the famous schoolboy
who picked up a football and ran straight into sporting history.

Friday morning was again cloudy and gray.
Unlike yesterday,
the passing hours did nothing to alleviate the overcast skies.
“A typical dull November day,” Rhoda proclaimed later in the afternoon.

We started with an hours cruise
from our mooring spot in Hillmorton into Rugby proper.
The canal never reaches downtown,
but the city is reaching out to it.
New housing developments are being built
on a hill that once held 800m-tall transatlantic radio towers.

A little further on, a new road bridge is being built over the canal.
Winter stoppages notices from the Canal and River Trust
warn us that, starting next week,
there may be delays coming past the bridge construction.
But they assure us the canal will stay open,
so we won't end up stranded on the wrong end of the Midlands from our marina.

Our mid-day mooring spot is in a formerly industrial section of the city,
now mostly replaced by new developments.
A key landmark noted in all our guidebooks —
and which Rhoda remembered from a previous trip —
is a large Tesco grocery store just south of the canal.

But the more picturesque downtown shopping district is a bit of a hike away,
so Rhoda suggested taking a bus.
Maps on our mobile devices helped us track down the right stop,
and the route into the city rolled us backwards in architectural history.

First we passed the giant 24-hour Tesco,
now flanked by multiple other big-box complexes
of chain retail stores and fast food restaurants grouped arround parking lots,
in an arrangement familiar to any North American city.
Rhoda was sure none of it had been here
when she passed through the city a decade ago.

From there, the bus passed fairly new townhouses
and a large college campus of late 20th-century vintage.
Opposite the college,
a GE plant represents the last of the old industrial section,
with one old brick factory building still standing
amongst the modern corrugated steel walls.

As we turned towards the city centre,
we passed through post-war houses and corner shops.
Finally we alighted of tightly packed brick and stone buildings
from the 18th and 19th century (and possibly earlier).

We took a few pictures and ran a few errands.
A birthday present for my nephew was acquired and posted.
Our sweets supply was fortified.

Lunch was at a café we stumbled upon in the market district.
I learned that a “batch” in local dialect
is the same as a “bap” elsewhere in England:
a sandwich served on a soft burger bun.
The batch I ordered featured brie cheese, cranberry sauce, and
that delicous British bacon I wish we could get at home:
fattier and more flavourful than Canadian back bacon
but still mostly meat, unlike the mostly-fat standard North American bacon.

On the bus back we got off at the stop near the Tesco and big-box stores.
Rhoda had noticed a Debenhams department store on her mobile map,
and a sale on luggage on the Debehnams website.
Even before I left Edmonton,
I'd been wishing I had a _slightly_ larger suitcase
than my carry-on.
But after wrenching my shoulder from my over-stuffed backpack,
the issue was harder to deny.

They didn't have much luggage selection at the store,
but we took a look at a display of brightly-colored hardshell roller cases.
The brighter colors seemed to be marked down more than the boring black cases,
which worked well with my taste.
But then Rhoda pointed out one particular case that was marked down even further,
but with the warning “faulty” scrawled across the price tag.
After both of us and two different store employees
examined the wheels, handles, zippers, and lock,
we came to the conclusion that the only fault was that it was last year's model.

Rhoda agreed to wheel my newly-purchased case back to the boat
while I went on a quick supply run at the Tesco.
By the time I'd finished and returned to the boat myself,
I was starting to worry about the short November daylight hours.
The solid gray clouds made it hard to judge the sun's position,
but the sky was definitely a little dimmer than before.

We didn't have far to go, though.
Just through to Newbold, the suburb on the other side of Rugby.
So I handed the groceries in to Rhoda, reved up the motor and untied.

Around the bend, we pass a side branch to the marina
from where Rhoda had rented a boat on that trip back in 2008.
We also pass _over_ the River Avon and a few roads on aqueducts —
but if you're not looking closely,
it's easy to miss the structures from the bramble-lined canal.

Coming up to a bend,
I was keeping a watchfull eye at a boat ahead.
We were clearly getting closer to each other,
so at first I thought they were coming towards us.
But no, they were faced in the same direction.
Except: are they trying to turn around in the middle of the canal?
Or maybe they are trying to moor up for the night?
No, not that either.
But they were zig-zagging back and forth unsteadily.

“It's Friday night,” Rhoda pointed out,
“Maybe they just hired it for the week and are still getting the hang of it.”

Thankfully, by the time we caught up to them,
the three young women in the back had got enough control
to hold the boat aside and let us pass.
Worried about the setting sun,
I didn't want to slow down and wait behind them.

I called out as we passed, to make sure they weren't in any engine trouble.
“We're just learning,” one said apologetically.
“So we're going _very_ cautiously,” said another.

We wished them the best,
and got a chance to wave again when they passed us tieing up Cotonwood
at the mooring point just a little farther on.
They seemed to have got a handle on steering by that point,
but I do hope they weren't going much farther tonight:
it was already getting dark.
