---
title: Stuck
date: 2018-11-17
done: false
---

The plan for Saturday was to leave Rugby and reach Coventry.
In between: a tiny tunnel at Newbold,
a few hours of countryside canals,
a single lock and a couple awkward turns separating the Oxford canal
(which we were on)
from the Coventry canal,
and then an hour or so driving towards the centre of the city,
maybe stopping at moorings a little further out.

I was awoken very early by the boat jostling back and forth.
Was someone climbing on it?
No, doesn't seem so.
Was an adjacent boat getting an early start?
Maybe.
But when I finally got up, they were both still there.
It had just been the blustery wind
knocking us against the retaining wall,
which was an unusual design,
metal panels that zig-zagged in and out every foot or so,
like sideways castle crenelations or a very dull saw.

At around 7:30am in the still dusky morning light,
another boat did pass us by.
“Already! We were supposed to be the first ones out today,” said Rhoda.
I don't think she was serious.
We were both still in PJs, eating breakfast,
and fussing around with computer devices.

But we did get going before 9am.
Rhoda spent a few minutes digging around in the “weed hatch”
that gives access to the propeller.
She found not just weeds but also some elastic that had got tangled up.
But that's just routine maintenance.

The Newbold tunnel is less than 200m long,
not much longer than an expressway overpass.
But I was still worried when I saw an oncoming boat as I approached it.
I tried shifting over to my side,
but it would be very tight fit for two narrowboats to pass.

Luckily, the other boaters decided to play it safe
and wait for us in the open canal.
In addition to being narrow, the water in the tunnel was shallow,
and I had to back up and reposition myself in the center of the channel
to get any good forward momentum.

(Shallow water makes it difficult for the propeller to do its job.)

There seemed to be a lot of shallow water along this stretch.
We weren't going very fast, even with a lot of gas;
the propeller was kicking up a lot of fuss
instead of pushing us along cleanly.
Another boat behind us was steadily catching up.
Rhoda took over the tiller as we pulled to the side
to let it pass.
“Something on your propeller,” the driver called,
“Give it a hard reverse to shake it loose.”

That seemed to improve things,
and we were able to keep time with his boat
until he signalled, cyclist-style,
that he was going to make a hard turn into a marina.

The canal passed through many deep cuttings,
with tree-lined hills rising up on either side,
and leaning over the canal.
Fallen leaves coated the water,
and fallen branches and logs stuck out into the water
from the unmaintained side (opposite the tow-path).

Rhoda calls these stretches “green tunnels”.
Even with most of the leaves fallen,
the tunnel effect was still there,
the shade of the hills and the trees blocking out
the warm sun that had started to shine.

But our worst trouble of the day came in an open stretch,
with fields on either side of the canal.
But the problem wasn't outside the canal, it was in it.
There was a sharp bend,
and there were boats moored up all along the outside edge,
and bushes and reeds infringing on the inner corner.
An oncoming boat needed to be passed,
and the rules of the road said I was on the reedy side.

“Tight corner!” I called to the other driver
as we gingerly slid by each other.
“And it really shouldn't be,” he said,
with a disparaging look at all the bushes.

After he had passed,
I couldn't pick up any speed.
I tried reversing, in case I'd become grounded in mud.
That seemed to work, but I still couldn't go forward at more than a crawl.
I crawled past the moored-up boats,
then tried the quick reverse-then-forward trick a few times,
to try to clear the propeller.
Then Rhoda did the same.
We'd moved a few lengths of the boat from where we first got stuck,
but it still sounded like we were grounded,
with a low crunching sound when we tried to move forward.
But it also sort of seemed like a propellar problem,
as it was making quite a lot of mud as it spun helplessly.
Or maybe this was the transmission problem
we'd seemed to have previously?

Eventually, Rhoda decided we needed some help.
We pulled over and tied up.
She was going to check the weed hatch again,
then call the boat management company.
I took advantage of the earlier-than-planned midday break to have a shower
(while we still had plenty of hot water warmed by the engine)
then make us some lunch.

The Cotonwood is a shared ownership boat.
Rhoda legally owns <sup>1</sup/<sub>12</sub><sup>th</sup> of it.
But the various owners contract with a boat management company,
which coordinates scheduling and communication and all maintenance work.
If necessary, that includes emergency canalside maintenance
(at a cost).
The company they use is also affiliated with the marina team.

Rhoda had been talking on the phone with someone working at the marina,
explaining all the symptoms and peculiarities of the boat's behavior.
Their diagnosis:
If we can reverse but not go forward, we're probably grounded.

That seemed strange when we'd moved a few lengths of the boat
with the same problem persisting,
but Rhoda agreed to try again and call back if we were still stuck.
Maybe we were caught not on a mudbank,
but on a branch or something else that we were dragging along with us.

After lunch, therefore, we untied and started chugging backwards and forwards,
trying to get free.
One of us would drive while the other stood on the shore
to look for signs of obstacles or attachments.
In the midst of this, another boat came up behind us.
The driver slowed seeing our boat in the middle of the canal.

I was on the shore, so started walking back to explain matters
and promise that we could pull out of her way.
“Ask her if she'd mind giving us a bit of a tow,” Rhoda suggested.

I didn't need to ask, as it turned out.
After I'd explained that we seemed to be stuck,
and yes, we'd already checked the weed hatch,
and so we weren't sure whether it was an engine issue
or being caught on something we couldn't see,
she offered to pull us to a boatyard a little ways ahead,
where someone might be able to give us some more help.

She pulled up in front of us,
as I climbed out onto the front bow of the boat.
She tossed me her back rope,
I looped it around the T-pin on the Cotonwood's nose,
then back to her and she tied it up again.

Then, with a nod back to Rhoda at the stern of the Cotonwood,
she slowly started her engine and began chugging forward,
tugging us behind her.

If we'd been caught on something, it wasn't so bad with our own propeller quiet.
The joined boats didn't move fast, but they moved steady.
