---
title: Coventry
date: 2018-11-18
---

Sunday morning in Ansty was misty but pleasant.
There was heavy dew over everything,
but still no frost yet.

Rhoda was washing up the dishes while I had breakfast,
so I offered to take first shift at the tiller while she ate.
After our chilly arrival last evening,
we've decided that to keep good time for our return trip
we'll need to take turns warming up inside as the other drives.

I had her talk me through her morning motor check.
There's a grease dispenser that needs tightening,
and the propeller needs to be checked for weeds.
Since both had been checked at our unplanned maintenance stop
yesterday afternoon,
the hardest part was opening and closing all the access hatches.

As I untied the boat, starting from the bow,
it swung out into the empty canal.
That would make getting away from shore easy,
but it made it difficult to flip up the hanging rubber bolsters
which shielded us from knocking against the wall at night —
but which could be easily caught and tugged off their ropes
if left hanging down during the day.

I had to creep along the side of the boat holding onto the roof,
with my feet on a ridge slightly above water level designed for this purpose,
to grab the centre bolster.
I decided the front one could stay as it was for now.

This section of the canal was fairly open,
with gentle curves and fields on either side.
Only the sound of automobiles on out-of-sight highways
hinted at the nearness to a major city.
I passed a couple oncoming boats, but without incident.

After passing through another “cutting,”
where the canal was carved into the hill
and trees leaned over the water and autumn leaves floated across it,
I started to notice the now-familiar tug of a leaf-clogged propeller.

With a straight stretch in front of me and no boats in site,
I moved into the center of the channel
and tried the hard reverse, then forward, then reverse, maneuvre
to shake clear the propeller.
It's difficult to tell at first whether it works,
because the maneuvre completely destroys all your forward momentum.
But I seemed to chug along smoothly again after that.

Rhoda came up out of the kitchen to see what all the fuss was about
and whether I needed any relief.
I said I'd take us as far as the junction.

The Hawkesbury Junction is where the Oxford canal begins,
and where we'd be crossing on to the Coventry canal.
The two canals actually run parallel at this point,
less than a dozen metres apart,
connected by a perpendicular section.
(There used to be a different junction farther on,
so maybe it was a standard T-connection.)

Before the junction, there is a stop lock;
A lock that doesn't necessarily raise or lower the elevation significantly,
but allows the water in the two canals to be managed separately.
In a different era,
it also allowed the different canal companies to collect tolls efficiently.
Rhoda hopped out to work the lock
(we dropped about three inches from one side to the other),
then I tackled the hard right turn into the junction,
followed by the hard left towards Coventry,
followed immediately by pulling over to the wall to let Rhoda back on.

The guidebooks warn that —
in certain seasons and times of day —
steerers of boats can bear the brunt of attention
from jeerers at the adjacent pub's canalside patio.
But for the direction I was turning, there was plenty of room.
It wasn't a simple maneuvre, but it wasn't impossible.
I only even used the reverse once.
But there were no pub patrons to cheer me on,
only a couple curious pedestrians
and the staff of the Cheese Boat moored up in the turning basin.
I assume this is a cheese shop on a boat,
but we, alas, didn't take time to confirm on this trip.

Rhoda took over for the drive into Coventry proper,
through suburbs old and new (in former industrial areas).
The Coventry canal starts quite close to the old central part of the city,
before stretching off to the northwest to connect up with canal networks
around Birmingham and up to Manchester
(which will remain to be explored on a different trip).
Our plan for the day is to spend a few hours exploring downtown,
then turn the boat around and get ourselves started
for our return journey back to the marina.

