---
title: Frosty
date: 2018-11-22
done: true
---

I'm not sure what woke me while it was still dark,
but it quickly became clear that I would not get back to sleep
while it was so cold in the boat.

I slipped down the length of the boat to turn on the hot water radiators.
Alas, the heater control doesn't include a thermostat to do this automatically.
Apparently there is an alarm-clock setting
that would turn it on at a set time,
but we hadn't needed to figure it out before now.

Rhoda got up a little after dawn,
and peered out a window.
“There's white stuff on the grass. Frosty!” she remarked.
I pulled back the curtain above my bed.
I couldn't clearly see the grass on the opposite side of the canal,
but I could see and feel that the condensation
on the single-pane glass had frozen solid at the bottom.
I curled back under my blankets.

This is Rhoda's last day on the boat,
so she was spending the morning packing and tidying up.

Based on the original share-owners' schedule,
we'd need to have it back in the marina by tomorrow morning,
and her flight is tomorrow as well.
To avoid early morning train connection hassles,
she has opted to stay the night before at an airport hotel.

When _I'd_ booked my flights, I gave myself some extra days
with the plan to decide what to do with them later.
Then the boat owner who had the next week on the schedule
said he wouldn't use it,
and so we claimed the extra few days.
The extra time meant we could travel a little farther with less of a rush.
And I still have a paid-for place to stay these next few nights,
instead of paying for a hotel room in London
or wherever else I might have gone.

We're moored up at the top of the Buckby / Whilton locks.
Then plan is that Rhoda will help me get down them today,
then head to the train station,
leaving me nothing but flat canal between here and the marina.

I'll be in charge of cleaning up the boat for the next people who use it,
but Rhoda has tasked herself with one major clean-up before she leaves.

The engine room, under the stern deck,
has had a few inches of greasy water floating around in the bottom of it.
The water gets in from rain dripping around the edges of the access hatches,
and from canal water leaking in around the propeller shaft:
the space around the shaft is sealed up only by grease,
and you need to regularly adjust the valve that squeezes out
this “stern packing” grease.
It's a boring daily chore that can often get shirked.

There is a bilge pump to empty out this water.
It even has a sensor to automatically pump it out
if the water level gets too deep.
But the pump wasn't working, automatically or otherwise.

Rhoda's plan for dealing with the murky water
comes from a tip she read in a magazine or website forum.
How do you efficiently soak up and dispose lots of nasty wet?
With disposable diapers, of course.
(Nappies for you Brits.)
She bought a pack of them at our last grocery stop,
and spread them out over the muck when we moored up yesterday.
This morning, the soggy, greasy diapers will be bundled in a trash bag
and taken to the dumpster (or _skip_, as it's called here).

“I'm not sure it made an appreciable difference,” she said,
after she'd finally cleaned them all up.
She called up the maintenance manager for suggestions.
He warned that the automatic pump didn't normally kick in
until the water levels got really bad;
but if it wouldn't turn on manually, that needed fixing.
And he had a better solution for cleaning up the murk
so they could repair things later:
get it pumped out at the marina,
using the same equipment that pumps out our sewage tanks.

So that was a bit of a waste of time and effort, but it was done now.
The frost was starting to melt and we had seven locks to go
before Rhoda caught the train.

The locks went by fairly smoothly.
Rhoda and I swapped positions a couple times
between steering the boat and working the paddles.
The biggest annoyance came after some helpful pedestrians let me know,
as Rhoda was driving out of an empty lock,
that another boat was coming up.

In that case, I could leave the bottom gate open for them to drive right in.
But if that wasn't the case, I really shouldn't leave the gates open.
I peered down the hill, but there was a bend and lots of bushes
blocking view of the next lock.
There _was_ a boat facing this way, but it was moored up on the side.

I walked more than halfway to the next lock
before confirming that it didn't have any boat rising up in it,
then went back to shut the gate I'd left open.
Returning back to Rhoda working the next lock,
I discovered that there was a boat coming up —
two actually, tied together side-by-side and steered very carefully by one driver —
but it was this lock, not the previous one,
where we would be able to swap places without closing the gates.

“The problem with walkers,” said Rhoda,
“is that they don't always realize how long it takes us to get through the locks.”

To balance that out,
the bottom few locks were “very helpful,” to use Rhoda's words.
The upper gates swung upon on their own accord,
before or as Rhoda approached them in the boat.
Water levels were so high that water was flowing over top of the bottom gates,
meaning there was no difference in water pressure to hold the upper gates closed.

This section of the canal (and many other parts of the canal system)
had suffered from serious water shortages over the summer.
As late as October,
use of these locks was restricted to certain hours of the day,
in order to maximize the likelihood that boaters could double up
with other boats going the same way,
and swap turns with boats going in the opposite directions —
with less time in between for full locks to leak out.

I'm not sure if the high water levels in the lower locks
are really a sign of the water shortages improving, though.
They could just be a reminder that some of the upper locks
are very leaky.

Moored up just beyond the bottom of the flight,
we had a late lunch and then Rhoda prepared to go.
There is a rail station at Long Buckby that she would be deparating from,
but that was now a mile back up the tow path
and then a mile up a busy road.
A rather long and awkward walk with plenty of luggage.

Instead, she called the staff at marina that we were moored up next too,
and got a recommendation for a local taxi service.
That number went to voice mail, but it recommended a replacement service.
And so a half hour later we were saying goodbye in the marina parking lot
and then Rhoda headed off in the taxi
and I walked back to the boat for a quiet evening on my own.

I tried keeping warm with the little cast-iron stove,
but after my easy-light fire log was spent,
I couldn't keep it going with coal,
and eventually switched over to the more modern heater.
The forecast for the next few days didn't include any more freezing temperatures,
but that isn't the same as saying it would be warm.
