---
title: Onwards
date: 2018-11-15
done: true
---

Thursday morning dawned still and gray.

Rhoda had turned on the engine before I got up,
but she wasn't rushing to leave.
The engine does double duty as our electrical generator,
and after a full day moored our battery was running low.

The boat has two electrical systems.
A DC (direct current) loop pulls directly from the battery
and powers the lights, ventilation fans, refrigerator,
and a car stereo and a specially-adapted TV.
It also sends power to a few “car cigarette lighter”-style outlets,
which we have adapted into USB device chargers.
An AC (alternating current) system can be added
by turning on an inverter.
It powers the microwave and various outlets for personal electronics.
The oven and range run from cylinders of what the British call calor gas
(natural gas to us Canadians)
and, as previously mentioned,
heating uses either the solid-fuel stove
or the hot water radiators powered by a diesel calorifier (water heater).
Hot water for the sinks and showers
is generated from the engine heat,
complemented by the calorifier.

I had probably not helped the battery situation
by leaving the AC inverter on overnight.
We'd been watching pre-downloaded Netflix last night
on my laptop connected to the TV,
but had completely killed my laptop battery
by not having it plugged in _quite_ all the way in to the adapter.

There were two routes out of Braunston,
and we hadn't yet decided which one to take.
We could follow the Grand Union Canal west to Royal Leamington Spa.
Or we could take the northern branch of the Oxford Canal,
which goes past Rugby to connect up with the Coventry canal.

The southern branch of the Oxford Canal wasn't an option;
it was blocked by more lock repair work shortly after it splits
from the Grand Union a few miles west of here.
The Grand Union itself is blocked by more work beyond Royal Leamington —
November through February is winter repair work season
for the Canal and River Trust.

Neither Rhoda nor I had particular preferences for visiting
Rugby and Coventry versus Royal Leamington Spa.
She's visited all three cities previously, but only briefly,
and I'd never seen any of the above.

The main difference, therefore, came in the canals to get there.
The route west had 23 locks; the longer route north had a single set of three.
We opted for the lazy vacation, north to Rugby.

Before heading out we spent a good hour
making use of the services at the Braunston marina.
Trash bins were emptied out,
while the big water tank at the front of the boat 
and the diesel tank at the back were both filled up.

By the time we really got moving,
the clouds had started to crack
and it soon turned into a lovely day.

The scenery was a perfect pastoral English countryside.
On either side:
rolling green hills seamed by hedgerows
and dotted with sheep and cattle.
Although most of the bushes lining the canal had lost their leaves,
they were still colourful with bright berries
and lichen-coated branches.

(But I was driving, so I didn't take any photos to share.)

The canal meandered, but not quite so much as before.
Every so often we reached a conspicuously straight section,
bounded on either side by steep ridges,
where the route had cut straight through the hills instead of wrapping around them.

We past quite a few oncoming boats —
some of them even in locations with no navigation hazards!
That said, I did end up slightly aground on the muddy bank at one point.
There were two Canal and River Trust workboats moored side-by-side taking up half the canal,
and of course there was an oncoming boat just as I approached them.
I slowed to an idle, shifting over to make room,
but misjudged the depth of the water on the reedy side of the canal.
But, I was able to back out with no problem once the other boat was passed,
so no harm done.

We also passed a number of large marinas to go with those extra boats,
including one that was marked as “under construction” in our five-year-old guidebook —
but which now was half-full of boats.

After a few hours,
the countryside started to sprout suburban housing developments.
We'd reached the outskirts of Rugby.
Before we reached the city proper,
we had to go down the flight of three locks at Hillmorton.
We moored up ahead of them for lunch, then tackled the set in the afternoon.

There are actually _six_ locks at Hillmorton,
but you only have to pass through half of them.
The Oxford canal uses true narrowboat locks, 8 feet across,
unlike the broad-canal locks we'd dealt with previously on this trip.
With broad locks, narrowboats can double up during busy season.
To gain the same efficiency here,
at some point all the locks were duplicated,
so there are two separate chambers available at each step.

The arrangement also increases the chance
that at least one in each pair of locks will be set up as you need it —
full for going down, empty if you want to go up.
The only complication came when I pulled over to wait for a boat
that was almost finished coming up.
I tied up on the side opposite where that boat would be pulling out,
and only later realized that I'd set myself a tricky steering job
to shift back to the other side of the pound.

At the bottom lock, I traded places with Rhoda,
and had a friendly chat with a couple out for a stroll.
Yes, we can sleep on board the boat.
Yes, there's even electricity.
No, you don't need a licence to drive it,
although the boat itself needs a licence
and you can take a weekend boat-driver's course if you want.

They even helped open and close one of the bottom gates,
saving me having to walk back and cross over the top gate to get to the other side.

(On the broad locks,
we were getting away with only opening one of the V-shaped pair of bottom gates.
But on the narrow locks, you need to open both sides to fit through!)

We decided to moor up for the night just on the other side of the locks,
instead of continuing in to the busy part of the city.
It was designated mooring area,
with hitching rings in the ground,
so we were surprised to find that the canal bank was not cut vertically.
We could not pull the boat tight against the shore.

I used the boat hook to grab the coil of rope off the bow of the boat,
and threaded it through the mooring ring,
but then waited for Rhoda to tie up the stern.
But she was waiting for me:
“Can the rope not reach all the way back to the T-pin?” she asked,
referring to the tie-point affixed on the boat's prow.
It's more secure to double up the rope,
running it through the mooring loop and back to the boat.

“The rope can reach, but I don't think I can,” I explained.
There was a good foot of water between the muddy bank and the upturned nose of the boat.
I was worried that as soon as I stepped across and leaned on the boat,
it would float out away from the shore,
leaving me doing the splits into the water.

Rhoda tied off her end,
and came back to hold the boat in place with the boat hook.
I looped the rope up carefully and stepped gingerly onto the prow —
and immediately slipped and stepped into the canal instead.

Rhoda and the boat hook prevented the boat from floating away,
but not from rocking underneath me.

It wasn't too bad;
I was able to fall back onto the muddy shore,
so only one foot got soaked.
Rhoda offered to take over,
but I figured only one of us needed to get drenched.
After some more careful strategizing,
I climbed onto the boat farther back
(where it was full-width and therefore closer to the shore)
worked my way up to the front,
and then Rhoda handed me the rope to tie with.
Then I went inside to change to clean trousers
and set my boot to dry.
